When it was the Three Hundred and Eighty-sixth Night

She said, It hath reached me, "O auspicious King, that Queen
Zubaydah entered the garden one day and, coming to the swimming-
bath, gazed upon its goodliness; and the sheen of the water and
the overshading of the trees pleased her.  Now it was a day of
exceeding heat; so she doffed her clothes and, entering the tank,
which was not deep enough to cover the whole person, fell to
pouring the water over herself from an ewer of silver.  It also
happened that the Caliph heard she was in the pool; so he left
his palace and came down to spy upon her through the screen of
the foliage.  He stood behind the trees and espied her mother-
nude, showing everything that is kept hidden.  Presently, she
became aware of him and turning, saw him behind the trees and was
ashamed that he should see her naked.  So she laid her hands on
her parts, but the Mount of Venus escaped from between them, by
reason of its greatness and plumpness; and the Caliph at once
turned and went away, wondering and reciting this couplet,

     "I looked on her with loving eyne *
          And grew anew my old repine:"

But he knew not what to say next; so he sent for Abu Nowas and
said to him, "Make me a piece of verse commencing with this
line."  "I hear and obey," replied the poet and in an eye-
twinkling extemporised these couplets,

     "I looked on her with longing eyne *
          And grew anew my old repine
     For the gazelle, who captured me  *
          Where the two lotus-trees incline:
     There was the water poured on it *
          From ewer of the silvern mine;
     And seen me she had hidden it *
          But twas too plump for fingers fine.
     Would Heaven that I were on it, *
          An hour, or better two hours, li'en."

Thereupon the Commander of the Faithful smiled and made him a
handsome present and he went away rejoicing.  And I have heard
another story of





              HARUN AL-RASHID AND THE THREE POETS



The Prince of True Believers, Caliph Harun al-Rashid, was
exceeding restless one night; so he rose and walked about his
palace, till he happened upon a handmaid overcome with wine.  Now
he was prodigiously enamoured of this damsel; so he played with
her and pulled her to him, whereupon her zone fell down and her
petticoat-trousers were loosed and he besought her of amorous
favour.  But she said to him, "O Commander of the Faithful wait
till to-morrow night, for I am unprepared for thee, knowing not
of thy coming."  So he left her and went away.  But, when the
morrow showed its light and the sun shone bright, he sent a page
to her saying, "The Commander of the Faithful is about to visit
thine apartment;" but she replied, "Day doth away with the
promise of night."  So he said to his courtiers, "Make me
somewhat of verse, introducing these words, The Promise of Night
is effaced by Day.'" Answered they, "We hear and obey," and Al-
Rakαshi came forward and recited the following couplets,

     "By Allah, couldst thou but feel my pain, *
          Thy rest had turned and had fled away.
     Hath left me in sorrow and love distraught, *
          Unseen and unseeing, that fairest may:
     She promised me grace, then jilted and said, *
          The promise of night is effaced by day!'"

Then Abu Mus'ab came forward and recited these couplets,

     "When wilt thou be wise and love-heat allay *
          That from food and sleeping so leads astray?
     Suffices thee not ever weeping eye, *
          And vitals on fire when thy name they say?
     He must smile and laugh and in pride must cry *
          The promise of Night is effaced by Day.'"

Last came Abu Nowas and recited the following couplets,

     "As love waxt longer less met we tway *
          And fell out, but ended the useless fray;
     One night in the palace I found her fou'; *
          Yet of modesty still there was some display:
     The veil from her shoulders had slipt; and showed *
          Her loosened trousers Love's seat and stay:
     And rattled the breezes her huge hind cheeks *
          And the branch where two little pomegranates lay:
     Quoth I, Give me tryst;' whereto quoth she *
          To-morrow the fane shall wear best array:'
     Next day I asked her, Thy word?'  Said she *
          The promise of Night is effaced by Day.'"

The Caliph bade give a myriad of money each to Al-Rakashi and Abu
Mus'ab, but bade strike off the head of Abu Nowas, saying, "Thou
wast with us yesternight in the palace."  Said he, "By Allah, I
slept not but in my own house!  I was directed to what I said by
thine own words as to the subject of the verse; and indeed quoth
Almighty Allah (and He is the truest of all speakers): As for
poets (devils pursue them!) dost thou not see that they rove as
bereft of their senses through every valley and that they say
that which they do not?'"  So the Caliph forgave him and
gave him two myriads of money.  And another tale is that of





           MUS'AB BIN AL-ZUBAYR AND AYISHAH HIS WIFE



It is told of Mus'ab bin al-Zubayr that he met in Al-
Medinah Izzah, who was one of the shrewdest of women, and said to
her, "I have a mind to marry Ayishah daughter of Talhah,
and I should like thee to go herwards and spy out for me how she
is made."  So she went away and returning to Mus'ab, said, "I
have seen her, and her face is fairer than health; she hath large
and well-opened eyes and under them a nose straight and smooth as
a cane; oval cheeks and a mouth like a cleft pomegranate, a neck
as a silver ewer and below it a bosom with two breasts like twin-
pomegranates and further down a slim waist and a slender stomach
with a navel therein as it were a casket of ivory, and back parts
like a hummock of sand; and plumply rounded thighs and calves
like columns of alabaster; but I saw her feet to be large, and
thou wilt fall short with her in time of need."  Upon this report
he married her,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Three Hundred and Eighty-seventh Day

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Izzah
this wise reported of Ayishah bint Talhah, Mus'ab married her and
went in to her.  And presently Izzah invited Ayishah and the
women of the tribe Kuraysh to her house, when Ayishah sang these
two couplets with Mus'ab standing by,

     "And the lips of girls, that are perfume sweet; *
          So nice to kiss when with smiles they greet:
     Yet ne'er tasted I them, but in thought of him; *
          And by thought the Ruler rules worldly seat."

The night of Mus'ab's going in unto her, he departed not from
her, till after seven bouts; and on the morrow, a freewoman of
his met him and said to him, "May I be thy sacrifice!  Thou art
perfect, even in this."  And a certain woman said, "I was with
Ayishah, when her husband came in to her, and she lusted for him;
so he fell upon her and she snarked and snorted and made use of
all wonder of movements and marvellous new inventions, and I the
while within hearing.  So, when he came out from her, I said to
her, How canst thou do thus with thy rank and nobility and
condition, and I in thy house?'  Quoth she, Verily a woman
should bring her husband all of which she is mistress, by way of
excitement and rare buckings and wrigglings and
motitations.  What dislikest thou of this?'  And I
answered I would have this by nights.'  Rejoined she, Thus is
it by day and by night I do more than this; for when he seeth me,
desire stirreth him up and he falleth in heat; so he putteth it
out to me and I obey him, and it is as thou seest.'"  And there
also hath reached me an account of





                ABU AL-ASWAD AND HIS SLAVE-GIRL



Abu al-Aswad bought a native-born slave-girl, who was blind of an
eye, and she pleased him; but his people decried her to him;
whereat he wondered and, turning the palms of his hands
upwards, recited these two couplets,

     "They find me fault with her where I default ne'er find, *
          Save haply that a speck in either eye may show:
     But if her eyes have fault, of fault her form hath none, *
          Slim-built above the waist and heavily made below."

And this is also told of






            HARUN AL-RASHID AND THE TWO SLAVE-GIRLS



The Caliph Harun al-Rashid lay one night between two slave-girls,
one from Al-Medinah and the other from Cufa and the Cufite rubbed
his hands, whilst the Medinite rubbed his feet and made his
concern stand up.  Quoth the Cufite, "I see thou wouldst
keep the whole of the stock-in-trade to thyself; give me my share
of it."  And the other answered, "I have been told by Mαlik, on
the authority of Hishαm ibn Orwah, who had it of his
(grand) father, that the Prophet said, Whoso quickeneth the
dead, the dead belongeth to him and is his.'  But the Cufite took
her unawares and, pushing her away, seized it all in her own hand
and said, "Al-A'amash telleth us, on the authority of Khaysamah,
who had it of Abdallah bin Mas'ud, that the Prophet declared,
Game belongeth to him who taketh it, not to him who raiseth
it.'"  And this is also related of





            THE CALIPH HARUN AL-RASHID AND THE THREE
                          SLAVE-GIRLS



The Caliph Harun al-Rashid once slept with three slave-girls, a
Meccan, a Medinite and an Irakite.  The Medinah girl put her hand
to his yard and handled it, whereupon it rose and the Meccan
sprang up and drew it to herself.  Quoth the other, "What is this
unjust aggression?  A tradition was related to me by
Mαlik after Al-Zuhri, after Abdallah ibn Sαlim, after
Sa'νd bin Zayd, that the Apostle of Allah (whom Allah bless and
keep!) said:  Whoso enquickeneth a dead land, it is his.'  And
the Meccan answered, "It is related to us by Sufyαn, from Abu
Zanαd, from Al-A'araj, from Abu Horayrah, that the Apostle of
Allah said: The quarry is his who catcheth it, not his who
starteth it.'"  But the Irak girl pushed them both away and
taking it to herself, said, "This is mine, till your contention
be decided."  And they tell a tale of





                    THE MILLER AND HIS WIFE



There was a miller, who had an ass to turn his mill; and he was
married to a wicked wife, whom he loved, while she hated him
because she was sweet upon a neighbour, who misliked her and held
aloof from her.  One night, the miller saw, in his sleep, one who
said to him, "Dig in such a spot of the ass's round in the mill,
and thou shalt find a hoard."  When he awoke, he told his wife
the vision and bade her keep the secret; but she told her
neighbour,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

     