When it was the Three Hundred and Ninety-sixth Night

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the two
youths said to the Commander of the Faithful, Omar son of Al-
Khattab, "Our father was a man honoured by the tribes, sound of
baseness and renowned for goodliness, who reared us delicately in
childhood and loaded us with favours in manhood; in fine, a sea
of noble and illustrious qualities, worthy of the poet's praise,

     Is Aub's-Sakr of Shaybαn?' they asked; *
          Quoth I, Nay, by my life, of him's Shaybαn:
     How many a sire rose high by a noble son, *
          As Allah's prophet glorified Adnan!'

Now he went forth this day to his garden, to refresh himself
amongst its trees and pluck the ripe fruits, when this young man
slew him wrongously and swerved from the road of righteousness;
wherefore we demand of thee the retribution of his crime and call
upon thee to pass judgement upon him, according to the
commandment of Allah."  Then Omar cast a terrible look at the
accused youth and said to him, "Verily thou hearest the complaint
these two young men prefer; what hast thou in reply to aver?"
But he was brave of heart and bold of speech, having doffed the
robe of pusillanimity and put off the garb of cowardry; so he
smiled and spake in the most eloquent and elegant words; and,
after paying the usual ceremonial compliments to the Caliph,
said, ""By Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, I have indeed
given ear to their complaint, and they have told the truth in
that which they tell, so far as they have set out what befel; and
the commandment of Allah is a decreed decree.  but I will
forthright state my case between they hands, and it is for thee
to give commands.  Know then, O Prince of the Faithful, that I am
a very Arab of the Arabies, the noblest of those that are
beneath the skies.  I grew up in the dwellings of the wold and
fell, till evil times my tribe befel, when I came to the
outskirts of this town, with my family and whatso goods I own:
and, as I went along one of the paths leading to its gardens,
orchards and garths, with my she-camels highly esteemed and by me
most precious deemed, and midst them a stallion of noble blood
and shape right good, a plenteous getter of brood, by whom the
females abundantly bore and who walked among them as though a
kingly crown he wore, one of the she-camels broke away; and,
running to the garden of these young men's father, where the
trees showed above the wall, put forth her lips and began to feed
as in stall.  I ran to her, to drive her away, when behold, there
appeared, at a breach of the wall, an old man and grey, whose
eyes sparkled with angry ray, holding in his right a stone to
throw and swaying to and fro, with a swing like a lion ready for
a spring.  He cast the stone at my stallion, and it killed him
for it struck a vital part.  When I saw the stallion drop dead
beside me, I felt live coals of anger kindled in my heart; so I
took up the very same stone and throwing it at the old man, it
was the cause of his bane and ban: thus his own wrongful act
returned to him anew, and the man was slain of that wherewith he
slew.  When the stone struck him, he cried out with a great cry
and shrieked out a terrible shriek, whereupon I hastened from the
spot; but these two young men hurried after me and laid hands on
me and before thee carried me."  Quoth Omar (Almighty Allah
accept of him!), "Thou hast confessed what thou committedest, and
of acquittal there is no possible occasion; for urgent is the law
of retaliation and they cried for mercy but it was not a time to
escape."  the youth answered, "I hear and obey the
judgement of the Imam, and I consent to all required by the law
of Al-Islam; but I have a young brother, whose old father, before
his decease, appointed to him wealth in great store and gold
galore, and committed his affair to me before Allah, saying: I
give this into thy hand for thy brother; keep it for him with all
thy might.'  So I took the money and buried it; nor doth any know
of it but I.  Now, if thou adjudge me to be justiced forthright,
the money will lost and thou shalt be the cause of its loss;
wherefore the child will sue thee for his due on the day when the
Creator shall judge between His creatures.  But, if thou wilt
grant me three days' delay, I will appoint some guardian to
administer the affairs of the boy and return to answer my debt;
and I have one who will be my surety for the fulfillment of this
my promise."  So the Commander of the Faithful bowed his head
awhile, then raised it and looking round upon those present,
said, "Who will stand surety by me for his return to this place?"
And the youth looked at the faces of those who were in company
and pointing to Abu Zarr, in preference to all present,
said, "This man shall answer for me and be my bail."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

    