When it was the Seven Hundred and Eleventh Night,

She resumed, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Ahmad the Abortion had made known the place, Ali laid hold of
him and would have taken the dinar from him, but could not; so
he said to him, "Go: thou deservest largesse for thou art a
sharp  fellow, whole of wit and stout of heart. Inshallah, if
I become a  captain to the Caliph, I will make thee one of my
lads." Then  the boy made off and Ali Zaybak went up to the
door and knocked;  whereupon quoth Ahmad al-Danaf, "O
doorkeeper, open the  door; that is the knock of Quicksilver
Ali the Cairene." So he  opened the door and Ali entered and
saluted with the salam  Ahmad who embraced him, and the Forty
greeted him. Then  Calamity Ahmad gave him a suit of clothes,
saying, "When the  Caliph made me captain, he clothed my lads
and I kept this suit  for thee." Then they seated him
in the place of honour and  setting on meat they ate well and
drink they drank hard and  made merry till the morning, when
Ahmad said to Ali, "Beware  thou walk not about the streets of
Baghdad, but sit thee still in  this barrack." Asked Ali, "Why
so? Have I come hither to be  shut up? No, I came to look
about me and divert myself."  Replied Ahmad, "O my son, think
not that Baghdad be like  Cairo. Baghdad is the seat of the
Caliphate; sharpers abound  therein and rogueries spring
therefrom as worts spring out of  earth." So Ali abode in the
barrack three days when Ahmad  said to him, "I wish to present
thee to the Caliph, that he  may assign thee an allowance."
But he replied, "When the  time cometh." So he let him go his
own way. One day, as  Ali sat in the barrack, his breast
became straitened and his soul  troubled and he said in
himself, "Come, let us up and thread the  ways of Baghdad and
broaden my bosom." So he went out and  walked from street to
street, till he came to the middle bazar,  where he entered a
cook-shop and dined; after which he went out  to wash
his hands. Presently he saw forty slaves, with felt  bonnets
and steel cutlasses, come walking, two by two; and last of all
came Dalilah the Wily, mounted on a she-mule, with a gilded
helmet which bore a ball of polished steel, and clad in a coat
of  mail, and such like. Now she was returning from the Divan
to  the Khan of which she was portress; and when she espied
Ali,  she looked at him fixedly and saw that he resembled
Calamity  Ahmad in height and breadth. Moreover, he was clad
in a striped  Ab√°-cloak and a burnous, with a steel cutlass by
his side and  similar gear, while valour shone from his eyes,
testifying in favour  of him and not in disfavour of him. So
she returned to the Khan  and going in to her daughter,
fetched a table of sand, and struck  a geomantic figure,
whereby she discovered that the stranger's  name was Ali of
Cairo and that his fortune overcame her fortune  and that of
her daughter. Asked Zaynab, "O my mother, what  hath befallen
thee that thou hast recourse to the sand-table?"  Answered
Dalilah, "O my daughter, I have seen this day a young  man who
resembleth Calamity Ahmad, and I fear lest he come to  hear
how thou didst strip Ahmad and his men and enter the Khan  and
play us a trick, in revenge for what we did with his chief and
the forty; for methinks he has taken up his lodging in Al-
Danaf's  barrack." Zaynab rejoined, "What is this? Methinks
thou hast  taken his measure." Then she donned her fine
clothes and went  out into the streets. When the people saw
her, they all made love  to her and she promised and sware and
listened and coquetted and  passed from market to market, till
she saw Ali the Cairene coming,  when she went up to him and
rubbed her shoulder against him.  Then she turned and said
"Allah give long life to folk of  discrimination!" Quoth he,
"How goodly is thy form! To whom  dost thou belong?"; and
quoth she, "To the gallant like thee;"  and he said,
"Art thou wife or spinster?" "Married," said she.  Asked Ali,
"Shall it be in my lodging or thine? and she
answered, "I am a merchant's daughter and a merchant's wife
and in all my life I have never been out of doors till to-day,
and  my only reason was that when I made ready food and
thought to  eat, I had no mind thereto without company. When I
saw thee,  love of thee entered my heart: so wilt thou deign
solace my soul  and eat a mouthful with me?" Quoth he, "Whoso
is invited, let  him accept." Thereupon she went on and he
followed her from  street to street, but presently he
bethought himself and said,  "What wilt thou do and thou a
stranger? Verily 'tis said,  'Whoso doth whoredom in his
strangerhood, Allah will send him  back disappointed.' But I
will put her off from thee with fair  words." So he said to
her, "Take this dinar and appoint me a  day other than this;"
and she said, "By the Mighty Name, it  may not be but thou
shalt go home with me as my guest this very  day and I will
take thee to fast friend." So he followed her till  she came
to a house with a lofty porch and a wooden bolt on the  door
and said to him, "Open this lock." Asked he "Where is
the key?"; and she answered, "'Tis lost." Quoth he, "Whoso
openeth a lock without a key is a knave whom it behoveth the
ruler  to punish, and I know not how to open doors without
keys?"  With this she raised her veil and showed him
her face, whereat he  took one glance of eyes that cost him a
thousand sighs. Then she  let fall her veil on the lock and
repeating over it the names of the  mother of Moses, opened it
without a key and entered. He  followed her and saw swords and
steel-weapons hanging up; and she  put off her veil and sat
down with him. Quoth he to himself,  "Accomplish what Allah
bath decreed to thee," and bent over her,  to take a kiss of
her cheek; but she caught the kiss upon her palm,  saying,
"This beseemeth not but by night." Then she brought a  tray of
food and wine, and they ate and drank; after which she  rose
and drawing water from the well, poured it from the ewer over
his hands, whilst he washed them. Now whilst they were on this
wise, she cried out and beat upon her breast, saying, "My
husband  had a signet-ring of ruby, which was pledged to him
for five  hundred dinars, and I put it on; but 'twas too large
for me, so I  straitened it with wax, and when I let down the
bucket, that  ring must have dropped into the well. So
turn thy face to the  door, the while I doff my dress and go
down into the well and  fetch it." Quoth Ali, "'Twere shame on
me that thou shouldst  go down there I being present; none
shall do it save I." So he  put off his clothes and tied the
rope about himself and she let him  down into the well. Now
there was much water therein and she  said to him, "The rope
is too short; loose thyself and drop down."  So he did himself
loose from the rope and dropped into the  water, in which he
sank fathoms deep without touching bottom;  whilst she donned
her mantilla and taking his clothes, returned to  her mother--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and  ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When is was the Seven Hundred and Twelfth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Ali
of Cairo was in the well, Zaynab donned her mantilla and,
taking  his clothes, returned to her mother and said, "I have
stripped Ali  the Egyptian and cast him into the Emir Hasan's
well, whence  alas for his chance of escaping!"
Presently, the Emir Hasan,  the master of the house, who had
been absent at the Divan, came  home and, finding the door
open, said to his Syce, "Why didst  thou not draw the bolt?"
"O my lord," replied the groom,  "indeed I locked it with my
own hand." The Emir cried, "As  my head liveth, some robber
hath entered my house!" Then he  went in and searched, but
found none and said to the groom,  "Fill the ewer, that I may
make the Wuzu-ablution." So the  man lowered the bucket into
the well but, when he drew it up, he  found it heavy and
looking down, saw something therein sitting;  whereupon he let
it fall into the water and cried out, saying, "O  my lord, an
Ifrit came up to me out of the well!" Replied the  Emir, "Go
and fetch four doctors of the law, that they may read  the
Koran over him, till he go away." So he fetched the doctors
and the Emir said to them, "Sit round this well and exorcise
me  this Ifrit." They did as he bade them; after which the
groom and  another servant lowered the bucket again and Ali
clung to it and  hid himself under it patiently till he came
near the top, when he  sprang out and landed among the
doctors, who fell a-cuffing one  another and crying out,
"Ifrit! Ifrit!" The Emir looked at Ali  and seeing him a young
man, said to him, "Art thou a thief?"  "No," replied Ali;
"Then what dost thou in the well?" asked  the Emir; and Ali
answered, "I was asleep and dreamt a wet  dream; so I
went down to the Tigris to wash myself and dived,  whereupon
the current carried me under the earth and I came up  in this
well." Quoth the other, "Tell the truth." So Ali told
him all that had befallen him, and the Emir gave him an old
gown and let him go. He returned to Calamity Ahmad's lodging
and related to him all that had passed. Quoth Ahmad, "Did I
not warn thee that Baghdad is full of women who play tricks
upon  men?" And quoth Ali Kitf al-Jamal, "I conjure thee by
the  Mighty Name, tell me how it is that thou art the chief of
the lads  of Cairo and yet hast been stripped by a girl?" This
was  grievous to Ali and he repented him of not having
followed  Ahmad's advice. Then the Calamity gave him another
suit of  clothes and Hasan Shuman said to him, "Dost thou know
the  young person?" "No," replied Ali; and Hasan rejoined,
"'Twas Zaynab, the daughter of Dalilah the Wily, the portress
of  the Caliph's Khan; and hast thou fallen into her toils, O
Ali?"  Quoth he, "Yes," and quoth Hasan, "O Ali, 'twas she who
took  thy Chief's clothes and those of all his men." "This is
a disgrace  to you all!" "And what thinkest thou to do?" "I
purpose to  marry her." "Put away that thought far from thee,
and console thy  heart of her." "O Hasan, do thou counsel me
how I shall do to  marry her." "With all my heart: if thou
wilt drink from my  hand and march under my banner, I will
bring thee to thy will of  her." "I will well." So Hasan made
Ali put off his clothes;  and, taking a cauldron heated
therein somewhat as it were pitch,  wherewith he anointed him
and he became like unto a blackamoor  slave. Moreover, he
smeared his lips and cheeks and pencilled  his eyes with red
Kohl. Then he clad him in a slave's habit and  giving
him a tray of kabobs and wine, said to him, "There is a  black
cook in the Khan who requires from the bazar only meat;  and
thou art now become his like; so go thou to him civilly and
accost him in friendly fashion and speak to him in the blacks'
lingo, and salute him, saying, ''Tis long since we met in the
beer-ken.' He will answer thee, 'I have been too busy: on my
hands be forty slaves, for whom I cook dinner and supper,
besides  making ready a tray for Dalilah and the like for her
daughter  Zaynab and the dogs' food.' And do thou say to him,
'Come, let  us eat kabobs and lush swipes.' Then go
with him into the  saloon and make him drunken and question
him of his service,  how many dishes and what dishes he hath
to cook, and ask him of  the dogs' food and the keys of the
kitchen and the larder; and he  will tell thee; for a man,
when he is drunken, telleth all he would  conceal were he
sober. When thou hast done this drug him and  don his clothes
and sticking the two knives in thy girdle, take the
vegetable-basket and go to the market and buy meat and greens,
with which do thou return to the Khan and enter the kitchen
and  the larder and cook the food. Dish it up and put Bhang in
it, so  as to drug the dogs and the slaves and Dalilah and
Zaynab and  lastly serve up. When all are asleep, hie thee to
the upper  chamber and bring away every suit of clothes thou
wilt find  hanging there. And if thou have a mind to marry
Zaynab, bring  with thee also the forty carrier-pigeons." So
Ali went to the  Khan and going in to the cook, saluted him
and said, "'Tis long  since I have met thee in the beer-ken."
The slave replied, "I  have been busy cooking for the slaves
and the dogs." Then he  took him and making him drunken,
questioned him of his work.  Quoth the kitchener, "Every day I
cook five dishes for dinner  and the like for supper; and
yesterday they sought of me a sixth  dish, yellow
rice, and a seventh, a mess of cooked pomegranate
seed." Ali asked, "And what is the order of thy service?" and
the slave answered, "First I serve up Zaynab's tray, next
Dalilah's;  then I feed the slaves and give the dogs their
sufficiency of meat,  and the least that satisfies them is a
pound each." But, as fate  would have it, he forgot to ask him
of the keys. Then he drugged  him and donned his clothes;
after which he took the basket and  went to the market. There
he bought meat and greens.--And  Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her  permitted say.

     