When it was the Three Hundred and Ninety-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
youth pointed to Abu Zarr and said, "This man shall answer for me
and be my bail," Omar (Allah accept of him!) said, O Abu Zarr,
dost thou hear these words and wilt thou be surety to me for the
return of this youth?"  He answered, "Yes, O Commander of the
Faithful, I will be surety for him for three days."  So the
Caliph accepted his guarantee and let the young man go.  Now when
the appointed time passed and the days of grace were nearly or
quite at end yet the youth came not, the Caliph took seat in his
council, with the Companions surrounding him, like the
constellations about the moon, Abu Zarr and the plaintiffs being
also present; and the avengers said, "Where is the defendant, O
Abu Zarr, and how shall he return, having once fled?   But we
will not stir from our places till thou bring him to us, that we
may take of him our blood revenge."  Replied Abu Zarr, "By the
truth of the All-Wise King, if the three days of grace expire and
the young man returneth not, I will fulfill my warranty and
surrender my person to the Imam;" and added Omar (whom Allah
accept!), "By the Lord, if the young man appear not, I will
assuredly execute on Abu Zarr that which is prescribed by the law
of Al-Islam!"  thereupon the eyes of the bystanders ran
over with tears; those who looked on groaned aloud and great was
the clamour.  Then the chiefs of the Companions urged the
plaintiffs to accept the blood-wit and deserve the thanks of the
folk; but they both refused and would accept nothing save the
talion.  However, as the folk were swaying to and fro like waves
and loudly bemoaning Abu Zarr, behold, up came the young Badawi;
and, standing before the Imam, saluted him right courteously
(with sweat-beaded face and shining with the crescent's grace)
and said to him, "I have given the lad in charge to his mother's
brothers and have made them acquainted with all that pertaineth
to his affairs and let them into the secrets of his monies; after
which I braved the heats of noon and have kept my word as a free-
born man."  Thereupon the folk marvelled, seeing his good faith
and loyalty and his offering himself to death with so stout a
heart; and one said to him, "How noble a youth art thou and how
loyal to thy word of honour and thy devoir!"  Rejoined he, "Are
ye not convinced that when death presenteth itself, none can
escape from it?  And indeed, I have kept my word, that it be not
said, Good faith is gone from among mankind.' " Said Abu Zarr,
"By Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, I became warrant for this
young man, without knowing to what tribe he belonged, nor had I
seen him before that day; but, when he turned away from all who
were present and singled me out, saying, This man shall answer
for me and be my bail,' I thought it not right to refuse him, and
generosity forbade to disappoint his desire, there being no harm
in compliance therewith, that it be not bruited abroad,
Benevolence is gone from among mankind."  Then said the two young
men, "O Commander of the Faithful, we forgive this youth our
father's blood, seeing that he hath changed desolation into
cheerfulness; that it be not said, Humanity is gone from among
mankind."  So the Caliph rejoiced in the acquittance of the youth
and his truth and good faith; moreover, he magnified the
generosity of Abu Zarr, extolling it over all his companions, and
approved the resolve of the two young men for its benevolence,
giving them praise with thanks and applying to their case the
saying of the poet,

     "Who doth kindness to men shall be paid again; *
          Ne'er is kindness lost betwixt God and men."

Then he offered to pay them, from the Treasury, the blood-wit for
their father; but they refused, saying, "We forgave him only of
our desire unto Allah, the Bountiful, the Exalted; and he
who is thus intentioned followeth not his benefits with reproach
or with mischief."  and amongst the tales they relate is
that of





                  THE CALIPH AL-MAAMUN AND THE
                   PYRAMIDS OF EGYPT



It is told that the Caliph Al-Maamun, son of Harun al-Rashid,
when he entered the God-guarded city of Cairo, was minded to pull
down the Pyramids, that he might take what was therein; but, when
he went about to do this, he could not succeed, albeit his best
was done.  He expended a mint of money in the attempt,--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

       