When it was the Three Hundred and Ninety-fifth Night,

She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Ja'afar asked the man, "Whence comest thou?"; he answered "From
Bassorah."  Quoth Ja'afar, "And whither goest thou?"  Quoth the
other, "To Baghdad."  Then Ja'afar enquired "And what wilt thou
do there?" and the old man replied, "I go to seek medicine for my
eye."  Said the Caliph, "O Ja'afar, make thou sport with him,"
and answered Ja'afar, "I shall hear what I shall exceedingly
mislike."  But Al-Rashid rejoined, "I charge thee on my
authority, jest with him."  Thereupon Ja'afar said to the Badawi,
"If I prescribe thee a medicine that shall profit thee, what wilt
thou give me in return?"  Quoth the other, "Allah Almighty will
requite the kindness with what is better for thee than any
requital of mine."  Continued Ja'afar, "Now lend me an ear and I
will give thee a prescription, which I have given to none but
thee."  "What is that?" asked the Badawi; and Ja'afar answered,
"Take three ounces of wind-breaths and the like of sunbeams and
the same of moonshine and as much of lamp-light; mix them well
together and let them lie in the wind three months.  Then place
them three months in a mortar without a bottom and pound them to
a fine powder and after trituration set them in a cleft platter,
and let it stand in the wind other three months; after which use
of this medicine three drachms every night in thy sleep, and,
Inshallah! thou shalt be healed and whole."  Now when the Badawi
heard this, he stretched himself out to full length on the
donkey's back and let fly a terrible loud fart and said
to Ja'afar, "Take this fart in payment of thy prescription.  When
I have followed it, if Allah grant me recovery, I will give thee
a slave-girl, who shall serve thee in they lifetime a service,
wherewith Allah shall cut short thy term; and when thou diest and
the Lord hurrieth thy soul to hell-fire, she shall blacken thy
face with her skite, of her mourning for thee, and shall keen and
beat her face, saying O frosty-beard, what a fool thou
wast?'"  thereupon Harun al-Rashid laughed till he fell
backward, and ordered the Badawi three thousand silver pieces.
And a tale is told of





             THE CALIPH OMAR BIN AL-KHATTAB AND THE
                          YOUNG BADAWI



The Sharif Husayn bin Rayyαn relateth that the Caliph Omar bin
Al-Khattαb was sitting one day judging the folk and doing justice
between his subjects, attended by the best and wisest of his
counsellors, when there came up to him a youth comely and cleanly
attired, upon whom two very handsome youths had laid hold and
were haling by the collar till they set him in the presence.
Whereupon the Commander of the Faithful, Omar, looked at him and
them and bade them loose him; then, calling him near to himself,
asked the twain, "What is your case with him?"  They answered, "O
Prince of True Believers, we are two brothers by one mother and
as followers of verity known are we.  We had a father, a very old
man of good counsel, honoured by the tribes, sound of baseness
renowned for goodliness, who reared us tenderly in childhood, and
loaded us with favours in manhood;"--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      